ZEP-0058: Allow direct exec without shell wrapping (#59)
zarf-dev/proposals: 0058-direct-exec-actions/README.md

# ZEP-0058: Direct Exec Mode for Component Actions

## Summary

> Introduce an opt-in `noShell: true` field on component actions that executes commands directly via `exec` syscall rather than wrapping them in `sh -e -c`. This enables hardened deployment environments where no shell binary is present, reducing attack surface for programmatic and unattended Zarf operations.

Reviewer: Agree with the overall intent! I would like to maybe think about naming. 

IE `noShell` versus something like `directExec`.  Primarily because it describes what Zarf _will do_ and `false` naturally preserves today's shell-wrapped default. 

Maybe even a enum? Not a blocking comment but something to discuss as this evolves.

3. **Implicit behavior**: Commands that are simple binary invocations (no pipes, no globbing, no variable expansion) gain nothing from shell wrapping but inherit all its risks.

Zarf is increasingly used in automated, unattended deployment pipelines (Kubernetes Jobs, GitOps controllers, CI/CD) where the execution environment should be as locked down as possible. The current architecture prevents this.

### Goals

- Allow action authors to opt out of shell wrapping on a per-action basis.
- Enable Zarf to operate in shell-free environments when all actions in a package use direct exec mode.
- Maintain full backward compatibility; shell wrapping remains the default.
- Provide clear error messages when `noShell` is used with commands that require shell features.

### Non-Goals

- Removing shell support or changing the default behavior for existing packages.
- Implementing a full command parser that handles quoting, escaping, or complex argument splitting equivalent to a shell.
- Addressing shell availability for `wait` actions (these do not invoke shell commands).

## Proposal

### User Stories

> #### Story 1: Hardened Initializer Container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Story 1: Hardened Initializing Container
```

same comment as below

> As a platform operator deploying Zarf in an air-gapped environment via a Kubernetes Job, I want to run the initializer from a `scratch`-based container image containing only the Zarf binary and the init package. Today this fails because the `git-server` component's actions require `/bin/sh`. With `noShell: true`, the init package's internal actions can execute directly, eliminating the need for a shell binary in the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a platform operator deploying Zarf in an air-gapped environment via a Kubernetes Job, I want to initialize a cluster with zarf from a `scratch`-based container image containing only the Zarf binary and the init package. Today this fails because the `git-server` component's actions require `/bin/sh`. With `noShell: true`, the init package's internal actions can execute directly, eliminating the need for a shell binary in the container.
```

`Initializer` is not (yet) a formal zarf component. Generalizing here for sake of accuracy.

| ----------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Users set `noShell: true` on commands that rely on shell features | Validation warning at `zarf package create` time if cmd contains shell metacharacters and `noShell` is set. Clear error message at runtime.                                                                 |
| Whitespace splitting is insufficient for complex arguments        | Document that arguments with spaces are not supported in `noShell` mode. For complex cases, users should create a wrapper binary or use shell mode. Future enhancement could support an `args` array field. |
| Breaking init package for environments that still have a shell    | No breaking change; this is opt-in. The init package can adopt `noShell` for its internal actions without affecting user-authored packages.                                                                 |

## Design Details

> ### Implementation

Reviewer: There may be elements of this implementation that we want to adjust as it occurs and we'll want to decouple that from the content of this ZEP specifically. 

For example - I think the branch for `noShell` might need some awareness around the command mutation that occurs earlier in the execution today.

Reviewer: More so when I think about potential requirements to continue supporting windows execution.

- **Integration test**: Deploy a component with `noShell: true` actions in an environment without `/bin/sh` (e.g., a distroless container) and verify successful execution.
- **Integration test**: Verify that shell metacharacters in a `noShell` command are passed literally (not interpreted).
- **Negative test**: Verify clear error when binary is not found in `noShell` mode.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- `noShell` field added to schema (behind feature flag if desired).
- Unit and integration tests passing.
- Documentation updated with usage examples and limitations.

#### Beta

- Init package internal actions (`update-gitea-pvc`, etc.) migrated to use `noShell: true`.
- Validation warning for shell metacharacters in `noShell` commands during `zarf package create`.
- Feedback collected from operators running in hardened environments.

#### Stable

- Feature flag removed (if one was used in alpha).
- Consider adding an `args` array field as an alternative to whitespace splitting for complex argument cases.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

- **Upgrade**: No action required. Existing packages without `noShell` continue to use shell wrapping. The field is additive.

> - **Downgrade**: Packages authored with `noShell: true` will fail schema validation on older Zarf versions. This is expected and documented.

Reviewer: I believe schema validation will fail here on _create_ but ultimately a package authored with an appropriate version but attempted install with an older CLI should probably require a `.build/versionRequirements`.
